Now that we've had a chance
to showcase and revisit
the SearchWithStreamGang
case study
and show how easy it was
to go from sequential
to parallel streams,
it's a good time
to take a step back and
look at the internals
of parallel streams and have
a better understanding of how
things work under the hood.
I gave you a quick synopsis
of this earlier this week,
but now I'm really going
to go into more detail
and really look in
great depth about how
parallel streams works.
It's really, really fascinating.
As we talked about
earlier in earlier weeks
when we discussed
sequential stream internals,
one of the first and most
important things to understand
is what aspects of
the parallel streams
framework you can change and
what aspects you can't change.
And you just have to come
to grips with the fact
you can't change everything,
and that's by design.
There's a lot of reasons
why the parallel streams
framework is designed and
implemented the way it is.
And you might quibble with
some of the design choices,
but I think you'll find the
practice is really quite good,
especially considering
you don't have
to write it, document it,
maintain it, debug it,
and so on.
So the first question, of
course, is, why do we care?
Who cares how parallel
streams works?
Shouldn't we just be happy
that it works so well?
And in fact, we've seen that
it's actually quite easy
to be parallel, so why do
we care how it does things
under the hood?
Well, as you'll see very
quickly, if you're just
having fun writing
little demo programs
or teaching a class
casually, it's
probably not that important
to know all the details
internally.
However, if you're
trying to write
performance-critical
applications,
it's essential to understand
how streams and parallel
streams work internally.
Because if you
understand how it works,
you'll be more likely to
use the right features
in the right
combinations in order
to get the right
performance that you
need to meet your requirements.
To start this
discussion, just recall
there were three phases
of a parallel stream.
I'm not going to dwell on
this because we've covered it
several times, but this
sets up the discussion
of what can change
and what can't change.
There's the splitting
phase, where
we use a spliterator to
partition the data source up
into multiple chunks.
There's the apply phase,
where we independently
process these chunks
in worker threads
in the common fork-join pool.
And then, finally, we
have the combined phase,
which joins the
partial sub-results
and merges them together into
a single, reduced result.
Now, it turns out that we can
make some changes to splitting,
we can make some
changes to combining,
but we're pretty much stuck with
the way the apply phase works
because there aren't many
knobs for controlling
the common fork-join pool.
We'll see that there's a
few little, simple knobs,
like influencing the
number of threads that
are in the fork-join
pool, but you really
can't control, for example, the
order in which the processing
takes place in parallel.
That's not something
you really can control.
So you've got to come to grips
with what you can control,
and then learn how to use
those control knobs effectively
to optimize and tune your code.